# Chapter 2.1

#### \*1. Analyze the logical forms of the following statements.

- (a) Anyone who has forgiven at least one person is a saint.

  $\exists x(\text{if x has forgiven a person, then x is a saint})$

  Let $S(x)$ be "$x$ is a saint", $F(y,x)$ be "$y$ has been forgiven by $x$", then

  $\exists x(\exists yF(y,x) \longrightarrow S(x))$

- (b) Nobody in the calculus class is smarter than everybody in the discrete math class.

  "Nobody" can be rewritten as "not somebody".

  Let $C(x)$ be "$x$ is in the calculus class", $D(x)$ be "$x$ is in the discrete math class", and $S(x,y)$ be "$x$ is smarter than $y$"

  $\neg \exists x(x\text{ is in the calculus class and is smarter than everyone in the discrete math class})$

  $\neg \exists x\Big[C(x) \land \text{if y is in the discrete math class and x is smarter than y}\Big]$

  $\neg \exists x\Bigg[C(x) \land \forall y\Big(D(y)\longrightarrow S(x,y)\Big)\Bigg]$

- (c) Everyone likes Mary, except Mary herself.

  Let $L(x)$ be "$x$ likes Mary", and $M(x)$ be "x is Mary"

  Rephrasing it for simplicity as "If you are not Mary, you like Mary", we have

  $\forall x\Big(\neg M(x) \longrightarrow L(x)\Big)$

  Which, by contrapositive could be written as "If you do not like Mary, you are Mary"

  $\forall x\Big(\neg L(x) \longrightarrow M(x)\Big)$

- (d) Jane saw a police officer, and Roger saw one too.

  Could be rewritten as a relationship clause, as $\exists y\Big[P(y) \land S(y,x)\Big]$ where $P(y)$ stands for "$y$ is a police officer" and $S(y,x)$ stands for "$y$ has been seen by $x$"

  $\exists y\Big[P(y) \land S(y,Jane)\Big]\land \exists x\Big[P(x) \land S(x,Roger)\Big]$

- (e) Jane saw a police officer, and Roger saw him too.

  Could be rewritten as "There was a police officer that was seen by Jane and by Roger

  $\exists x\Big[P(x) \land S(x, Jane) \land S(x, Roger)\Big]$

#### 2. Analyze the logical forms of the following statements.

- (a) Anyone who has bought a Rolls Royce with cash must have a rich uncle.

  Anyone means everyone, in the sentence above.

  "If $x$ has bought a Rolls Royce with cash, then $x$ has a rich uncle"

  Let $B(x)$ stand for "$x$ has bought a Rolls Royce with cash, $R(x)$ b. "$x$ has a rich uncle", then

  $\forall x\Big[B(x)\longrightarrow R(x)\Big]$

- (b) If anyone in the dorm has the measles, then everyone who has a friend in the dorm will have to be quarantined.

  Anyone means "somebody" in the sentence above, rewriting it we have:

  If somebody in the dorm has the measles, then everyone who has a friend in the dorm will have to be quarantined.

  Let

  | Statement | Be                      |
  | :-------: | :---------------------- |
  |  $D(x)$   | $x$ is in the dorm      |
  |  $M(x)$   | $x$ has the measles     |
  |  $Q(x)$   | $x$ will be quarantined |
  | $F(x,y)$  | $x$ is a friend of $y$  |

  then

  $\exists x\Bigg[D(x) \land M(x)\Bigg]\longrightarrow \forall y\Bigg[D(z) \land F(y,z) \longrightarrow Q(y)\Bigg]$

- (c) If nobody failed the test, then everybody who got an A will tutor someone who got a D.

  $\neg\exists x\Big[F(x)\Big]\longrightarrow\forall x\forall y\Bigg[\Big(A(x) \land D(y)\Big) \longrightarrow T(x,y)\Bigg]$

  where

  | Statement | Be                  |
  | :-------: | :------------------ |
  |  $F(x)$   | $x$ failed the test |
  |  $A(x)$   | $x$ got an A        |
  |  $D(x)$   | $x$ got a D         |
  | $T(x,y)$  | $x$ will tutor $y$  |

* (d) If anyone can do it, Jones can.

  Let $C(x)$ be "$x$ can do it", then

  $\forall x \exists y\Big[C(x)\longrightarrow (y = Jones) \land C(y)\Big]$

* (e) If Jones can do it, anyone can.

  $\forall x \exists y\Big[(y = Jones) \land C(y)\longrightarrow C(x)\Big]$

#### 3. Analyze the logical forms of the following statements. The universe of discourse is $\mathbb{R}$. What are the free variables in each statement?

- (a) Every number that is larger than x is larger than y.

  $\forall z \in \mathbb{R} (z>x \longrightarrow z > y)$, $z$ is bound, as $x$ and $y$ have to be provided (they are free).

- (b) For every number $a$, the equation $ax^2 + 4x - 2 = 0$ has at least one solution $iff$ $a \geq -2$.

  $\forall a\Big[S(ax^2+4x-2=0) \iff a \geq -2\Big]$, where $S(z)$ states that "$z$ has at least one solution". The free variable is $x$

  $\frac{-b\pm\sqrt{b^2-4ac}}{2a}=\frac{-4\pm\sqrt{16+8a}}{2a}$

  Pluging in to stay in $\mathbb{R}$ we need the term $16+8a$ to always be greater or equal than $0$, which means $16+8a \geq 0$, then $a\geq-2$

- (c) All solutions of the inequality $x^3 - 3x < 3$ are smaller than $10$.

  "If $y$ is a solution to the inequality $x^3 - 3x < 3$, then $y$ is smaller than $10$"

  $\forall y\Big[S(y,x^3-3x< 3) \longrightarrow x < 10\Big]$, where $S(x,y)$ stands for "$x$ is a solution to the $y$"

- (d) If there is a number $x$ such that $x^2 + 5x = w$ and there is a number y such that $4 - y^2 = w$, then $w$ is between $-10$ and $10$.

  $\exists w\Bigg[\exists x \big(x^2 + 5x = w\big) \land \exists y \big(4-y^2= w\big)\Bigg]\longrightarrow -10 \leq w \leq 10$

#### \*4. Translate the following statements into idiomatic English.

- (a) $\exists x\Bigg[\Big(H(x)\land \neg \exists yM(x,y)\Big)\longrightarrow U(x)\Bigg]$, where $H(x)$ means "$x$ is a man", $M(x, y)$ means "$x$ is married to $y$", and $U(x)$ means "$x$ is unhappy."

  Any man who is not married is unhappy.

- (b) $\exists z\Bigg(P(z,x)\land S(z,y) \land W(y)\Bigg)$, where $P(z, x)$ means “$z$ is a parent of $x$”, $S(z, y)$ means "$z$ and $y$ are siblings", and $W(y)$ means "$y$ is a woman".

  Someone is a parent and has a sister

#### 5. Translate the following statements into idiomatic mathematical English.

- (a) $\forall x \Bigg[\Big(P(x)\land \neg(x=2)\Big)\longrightarrow O(x)\Bigg]$, where $P(x)$ means "$x$ is a prime number" and $O(x)$ means "$x$ is odd."

  For all $x$, if $x$ is a prime number and is not equal to two, then prime is an odd number.

- (b) $\exists x\Bigg[P(x)\land\forall y\Big(P(y)\longrightarrow y \leq x\Big)\Bigg]$, where $P(x)$ means "$x$ is a perfect number".

  If there is an $x$ such that $x$ is a perfect number, and for all $y$ that is also a perfect number, then $y$ is less than or equal to $x$.

#### 6. Are these statements true or false? The universe of discourse is the set of all people, and P(x, y) means “x is a parent of y.”

- (a) $\exists x \forall y P(x,y)$.

  There is some person $x$ for which the statement $\forall y P(x,y)$ is true, that is to say, that for every person $y$, $y$ would be a child of $x$. This statement is $false$.

- (b) $\forall x \exists y P(x,y)$.

  For all people, there are some other people who are their children. True.

- (c) $\neg \exists x \exists y P(x,y)$.

  There is not somebody for which some other people are their child. False

- (d) $\exists x \neg \exists y P(x,y)$.

  There is some person for which there is not someone who is their child. True.

- (e) $\exists x \exists y \neg P(x,y)$.

  There is some person $x$ for which there is some other person $y$,whom $x$ is not their parent. True.

#### \*7. Are these statements true or false? The universe of discourse is $\mathbb{N}$.

- (a) $\forall x \exists y (2x - y = 0)$.
  - For all natural numbers, there is a number $y$ for which the equation $2x-y=0$ is true.
- (b) $\exists y \forall x (2x - y = 0)$.
  - There is some number $y\in\mathbb{N}$ for which every natural number $x$ satisfies the equation $2x-y=0$. This is false, as for any $y\in\mathbb{N}$, there is only one $x\in\mathbb{N}$ which satisfies the equation.
- (c) $\forall x \exists y (x - 2y = 0)$.
  - For all $x\in\mathbb{N}$ there exists at least one number $y\in\mathbb{N}$ that satisfies the equation $x -2y=0$, this is false, as for $x < 2$, the equation cannot be satisfied.
- (d) $\forall x \Big(x < 10 \longrightarrow \forall y(y < x \longrightarrow y < 9)\Big)$.
  - For all $x\in\mathbb{N}$, if $x< 10$, then for all $y\in\mathbb{N}$, if $y< x$ then $y < 9$. True.
- (e) $\exists y \exists z(y+z=100)$.
  - There is at least one $y\in\mathbb{N}$ and one $z\in\mathbb{N}$ that satisfy the equation $y+z=100$. True.
- (f) $\forall x \exists y\Big(y > x \land \exists z(y + z = 100)\Big)$.
  - This is false, as for any $x> 100$, there is no $z$ that can satisfy the equation $y + z = 100$.
