### \*1. Consider the following theorem. (This theorem was proven in the introduction.) Theorem. Suppose $n$ is an integer larger than $1$ and $n$ is not prime. Then $2^n − 1$ is not prime.

- (a) Identify the hypotheses and conclusion of the theorem. Are the hypotheses true when $n = 6$? What does the theorem tell you in this instance? Is it right?

  Hypothesis: $n$ is larger than 1 and $n$ is not prime. $n \gt 1 \land \neg P(n)$

  Conclusion: $2^n-1$ is not prime.

  For $n=6$; the hypotheses are true and $2^6-1=63$, which is not prime, rendering the conclusion true.

- (b) What can you conclude from the theorem in the case $n = 15$? Check directly that this conclusion is correct.

  $2^{15}-1=32,767$, not prime, therefore, true

- (c) What can you conclude from the theorem in the case $n = 11$?

  $2^{11}-1=2,047$, not prime, therefore, true

### 2. Consider the following theorem. (The theorem is correct, but we will not ask you to prove it here.)

**Theorem**. Suppose that $b^2 \gt 4ac$. Then the quadratic equation $ax^2 +
bx + c = 0$ has exactly two real solutions.

- (a) Identify the hypotheses and conclusion of the theorem.

  **Hypothesis**: $b^2\gt4ac$

  **Conclusion**: The quadratic equation $ax^2+bx+c=0$ has exactly two real solutions.

- (b) To give an instance of the theorem, you must specify values for $a$, $b$, and $c$, but not $x$. Why?

  Because $x$ is an unbound variable.

  $P(a,b,c)=\forall a\forall b\forall c\Big(b^2\gt4ac\implies \exist x_0\in \R\exist x_1\in \R(x_1,x_2=\frac{-b\plusmn\sqrt{b^2-4ac}}{2a}))$

- (c) What can you conclude from the theorem in the case $a = 2$, $b = −5$, $c = 3$? Check directly that this conclusion is correct.

  $25\gt24$

  $x_0,x_1=\frac{-(-5)\plusmn\sqrt{(-5)^2-4(2)(3)}  }{2(2)}$

  $x_0=\frac{5+\sqrt{1}  }{4}$; $x_1=\frac{5-\sqrt{1}  }{4}$ $\checkmark$

  The theorem holds true, as both the hypothesis and the conclusion are true.

- (d) What can you conclude from the theorem in the case $a = 2$, $b = 4$, $c = 3$?

  $16\ngtr24$

  $x_0,x_1\frac{-(4)\plusmn\sqrt{(-4)^2-4(2)(3)}  }{2(2)}$

  $x_0=\frac{4+\sqrt{3}i }{4}$; $x_1=\frac{4-\sqrt{3}i }{4}$ $\checkmark$

  The conclusion is false, but the hypothesis is also false, therefore, the theorem is true.

### 3. Consider the following incorrect theorem:

**Incorrect Theorem**._Suppose $n$ is a natural number larger than $2$, and $n$ is not a prime number. Then $2n + 13$ is not a prime number_.

What are the hypotheses and conclusion of this theorem? Show that
the theorem is incorrect by finding a counterexample.

**Hypothesis**: If $n$ is not prime and $n\in\N$ and $n\gt2$

**Conclusion**: Then $2n+13$ is not prime.

For any prime number $p$, where $\frac{p-13}{2}=n,p\geq19$

### \*4. Complete the following alternative proof of the theorem in Example 3.1.2.

_Proof_. Suppose $0\lt a\lt b$. Then $b-a\gt 0$.

[Fill in a proof of $b^2-a^2\gt 0$ here].

Multiplying both sides of $b-a\gt 0$ by $b$ gives us $b^2-ab\gt 0$

Multiplying both sides of $b-a\gt 0$ by $a$ gives us $ab-a^2\gt 0$

Thus, $b^2 \gt ab \gt a^2$, then $b^2\gt a^2$, thus $b^2-a^2\gt0$

Since $b^2-a^2\gt 0$, it follows that $a^2\lt b^2$. Therefore if $0\lt a \lt b$ then $a^2\lt b^2$

### 5. Suppose $a$ and $b$ are real numbers. Prove that if $a \lt b \lt 0$ then $a^2 \gt b^2$ .

_Proof_. Assume $a\lt b \lt 0$, then $a^2\gt b^2$

Since both $a$ and $b$ are less than $0$, multiplying by either $a$ or $b$ would reverse the direction of the inequality $a \lt b$, then

Multiplying both sides of $a \lt b$ by $a$ gives us $a^2 > ab$

Multiplying both sides of $a \lt b$ by $b$ gives us $ab > b^2$

Since $a^2 \gt ab \gt b^2$, it follows that $a^2 > b^2$. Therefore if $a\lt b \lt 0$, then $a^2\gt b^2$

### 6. Suppose $a$ and $b$ are real numbers. Prove that if $0\lt a \lt b$ then $\frac{1}{b}\lt\frac{1}{a}$

_Proof_. Assume $0 \lt a \lt b$,

$\frac{1}{a}\gt\frac{1}{b}$ is the multiplicative inverse of $a \lt b$, therefore if $0 \lt a \lt b$, then $\frac{1}{b}\lt\frac{1}{a}$

### 7. Suppose $a$ is a real number. Prove that if $a^3 \gt a$ then $a^5 \gt a$. (Hint: One approach is to start by completing the following equation: $a^5-a = (a^3-a)\cdot ?$)

_Proof_. Assume $a^3\gt a$, then $a^5\gt a$

Given $a^5-a=a(a^4-1)=a(a^2-1)(a^2+1)=(a^3-a)(a^2+1)$, then

$a^3\gt a\qquad ; \qquad a^3-a>0\text{ (i)}$

Multipliying (i) by $a^2+1$, we have

$(a^3-a)(a^2+1)\gt 0$

$a^5-a\gt 0 \quad \square$

### 8. Suppose $A \setminus B \subseteq C \cap D$ and $x \in A$. Prove that if $x\notin D$, then $x \in B$.

$\forall x \Bigg(x\in A \land x \notin B \implies x \in C \land x \in D\Bigg)$ (definitions of $\setminus$, $\subseteq$, $\cap$)

By contrapositive: Assume $x \notin B$, then $x \in D$

If $x\notin B$, then $x\in A \land x\notin B$ is true, then suppose $x \in D$, as defined

$true \implies x\in C \land x \in D$

Since $x \in C$ is irrelevant to our proof

$x \in D$

_Proof_. By contapositive. Suppose $x \notin B$, it follows from $A \setminus B \subseteq C \cap D$, that $x \in D$.
Therefore, if $x \notin D$, then $x \in B$.


### *9. Suppose $a$ and $b$ are real numbers. Prove that if $a \lt b$ then $\frac{a+b}{2} \lt b$

Assume $a \lt b$ (i).

Adding $b$ to both sides of (i)

$a + b \lt b + b$

$a + b \lt 2b$

$\frac{a + b}{2} \lt b$


### 10. Suppose $x$ is a real number and $x \neq 0$. Prove that if $\frac{\sqrt[3]{x}+5}{x^2+6}=\frac{1}{x}$ then $x\neq 8$.

By contrapositive, assume $x = 8$, then we have

$\frac{\sqrt[3]{x}+5}{x^2+6}\neq\frac{1}{8}$

$\frac{\sqrt[3]{8}+5}{8^2+6}\neq\frac{1}{8}$

$\frac{2+5}{64+6}\neq\frac{1}{8}$

$\frac{7}{70}\neq\frac{1}{8}$

$\frac{1}{10}\neq\frac{1}{8}\qquad \checkmark$

_Proof_. By contrapositive. Since $x=8$, then $\frac{\sqrt[3]{x}+5}{x^2+6}\neq\frac{1}{x}$ becomes $\frac{1}{10}\neq\frac{1}{8}$, which is true. Therefore, if $\frac{\sqrt[3]{x}+5}{x^2+6}=\frac{1}{x}$, then $x\neq 8$

### *11. Suppose $a$, $b$, $c$, and $d$ are real numbers, $0 \lt a \lt b$, and $d \gt 0$. Prove that if $ac \geq bd$ then $c \gt d$.

By contrapositive, assume $c \leq d$ (i), prove $ac \lt bd$.

$a$ & $b$ are greater than 0, given by $0 \lt a \lt b$

$d$ is greater than 0, given by $d \gt 0$.

By (i), it follows that $0 \lt c \lt d$.

$a \lt b$

Multiplying both sides of $a \lt b$ by $c$, we get $ac \lt bc$ (ii)

Multiplying both sides of $c \leq d$ by $b$, we get $bc \leq bd$ (iii)

By (ii), (iii):

$ac \lt bc \leq bd$, then $ac \lt bd$

_Proof_. By contrapositive. Assume $c \leq d$. Given $0 \lt a \lt b$, $d \gt 0$, and $ac \lt bd$ (by contrapositive), by multiplying $a \lt b$ by $c$, and multiplying $c \leq d$ by $b$, we can conclude that $ac \lt bd$. Therefore, given $(a,b,c,d)\in \R$, $0 \lt a \lt b$, and $d \gt 0$, if $ac \geq bd$, then $c \gt d$. $\square$

### 12. Suppose $x$ and $y$ are real numbers, and $3x+2y \leq 5$. Prove that if $x \gt 1$, then $y \lt 1$.

|            Givens            |            Goal            |
| :--------------------------: | :------------------------: |
| $x$ and $y$ are real numbers | $x \gt 1 \implies y \lt 1$ |
|       $3x + 2y \leq 5$       |                            |

Assume $x \gt 1$, then

|            Givens            |   Goal    |
| :--------------------------: | :-------: |
| $x$ and $y$ are real numbers | $y \lt 1$ |
|       $3x + 2y \leq 5$       |           |
|           $x\gt 1$           |

Then

$3x+2y \leq 5$

$y \leq \frac{5-3x}{2}$

For any $x \gt 1$, $5-3x$ will always be negative, which renders $y\leq 0$, then $y \lt 1$. Therefore, if $x \gt 1$, $y \lt 1$

### 13. Suppose that $x$ and $y$ are real numbers. Prove that if $x^2+y=-3$ and $2x - y = 2$ then $x = -1$

Assume $x^2+y=-3$ (i) and $2x - y = 2$ (ii), then

from (ii): $y = 2x - 2$

Substituting in (i):

$x^2 + (2x - 2) = -3$

Then, factoring and simplifying

$x^2 + 2x + 1 = 0$

$(x+1)^2=0$

$\sqrt{(x+1)^2}=\sqrt{0}$

$x+1=0$

$x=-1$

_Proof_. Given $x$ and $y$ are real numbers, suppose $x^2+y=-3$ and $2x-y=2$, by solving for $x$ in both equations, we get $x^2 + 2x + 1 = 0$, then we can conclude that $x = -1$. Therefore, if $x^2+y=-3$ and $2x - y = 2$, then $x = -1$ $\square$.

### *14. Prove the first theorem in Example 3.1.1. (Hint: You might find it useful to apply the theorem from Example 3.1.2)

__Theorem 3.1.1__ Suppose $x \gt 3$ and $y \lt 2$. Then $x^2-2y\gt 5$.

__Theorem 3.1.2__ Suppose $a$ and $b$ are real numbers. If $0 \lt a \lt b$ then $a^2 \lt b^2$.

Manipulating to find an equivalent term for $x \gt 3$

$x \gt 3$

$x^2 \gt 9$

$x^2 - 9\gt 0$

$x^2 - 5\gt 4$

And doing the same for $y \lt 2$

$y \lt 2$

$2y \lt 4$

Then, we have the inequalities

$2y \lt 4 \lt x^2 -5$

Simplifying:

$2y \lt x^2 -5$

By inverting the direction of the inequation $2y \lt x^2 -5$ and rearranging 

$-2y \gt -x^2 +5$

$x^2-2y \gt 5$

### 15. Consider the following theorem.

__Theorem__. Suppose $x$ is a real number and $x\neq 4$. If $\frac{2x-5}{x-4}=3$ then $x=7$.

- (a)  What's wrong with the following proof of the theorem?

    _Proof_. Suppose $x=7$. Then $\frac{2x-5}{x-4}=\frac{2(7)-5}{7-4}=\frac{9}{3}=3$. Therefore if $\frac{2x-5}{x-4}$ then $x=7$. $\square$

    The theorem has the form $P \implies Q$, and the proof assumes $Q$ to be true, and proceeds to prove $P$. It is proving the _converse_ of the theorem, that is, $Q \implies P$, which is not the same as proving $P \implies Q$, or as an alternative, $\neg Q \implies \neg P$.

- (b) Give a correct proof of the theorem.

    Assume  $\frac{2x-5}{x-4}=3$, then

    $2x-5=3x-12$ [multiply both sides by $(x-4)$]

    $-2x+5=-3x+12$ (invert equation)

    $x=7$

    _Proof_. Assume $\frac{2x-5}{x-4}=3$, then, by solving for $x$, we get $x=7$. Therefore, if $x\in\R$, $x\neq 4$, and $\frac{2x-5}{x-4}=3$, then $x=7$. $\square$

### 16. Consider the following incorrect theorem.

__Incorrect theorem.__ Suppose that $x$ and $y$ are real numbers and $x \neq 3$. If $x^2y=9y$ then $y = 0$.

- (a) What's wrong with the following proof of the theorem?

    _Proof._ Suppose that $x^2y=9y$. Then $(x^2-9)y=0$. Since $x\neq 3$, $x^2 \neq 9$, so $x^2-9\neq 0$. Therefore we can divide both sides of the equation $(x^2 -9)y=0$ by $x^2-9$, which leads to the conclusion that $y=0$. Thus, if $x^2=9y$ then $y=0$.

    It assumes that $x\neq 3$ also includes $x\neq -3$, which also renders $x^2-9=0$ 

- (b) Show that the theorem is incorrect by finding a counterexample.

    With $x_0=-3$, then becomes
    
    $(-3)^2y=9y$,

    $((-3)^2-9)y=0$, which will be true for any value of $y\neq 0$. Therefore, $y\neq 0$.