### \*1. Consider the following theorem. (This theorem was proven in the introduction.) Theorem. Suppose $n$ is an integer larger than $1$ and $n$ is not prime. Then $2^n − 1$ is not prime.

- (a) Identify the hypotheses and conclusion of the theorem. Are the hypotheses true when $n = 6$? What does the theorem tell you in this instance? Is it right?

  Hypothesis: $n$ is larger than 1 and $n$ is not prime. $n \gt 1 \land \neg P(n)$

  Conclusion: $2^n-1$ is not prime.

  For $n=6$; the hypotheses are true and $2^6-1=63$, which is not prime, rendering the conclusion true.

- (b) What can you conclude from the theorem in the case $n = 15$? Check directly that this conclusion is correct.

  $2^{15}-1=32,767$, not prime, therefore, true

- (c) What can you conclude from the theorem in the case $n = 11$?

  $2^{11}-1=2,047$, not prime, therefore, true

### 2. Consider the following theorem. (The theorem is correct, but we will not ask you to prove it here.)

**Theorem**. Suppose that $b^2 \gt 4ac$. Then the quadratic equation $ax^2 +
bx + c = 0$ has exactly two real solutions.

- (a) Identify the hypotheses and conclusion of the theorem.

  **Hypothesis**: $b^2\gt4ac$

  **Conclusion**: The quadratic equation $ax^2+bx+c=0$ has exactly two real solutions.

- (b) To give an instance of the theorem, you must specify values for $a$, $b$, and $c$, but not $x$. Why?

  Because $x$ is an unbound variable.

  $P(a,b,c)=\forall a\forall b\forall c\Big(b^2\gt4ac\implies \exist x_0\in \R\exist x_1\in \R(x_1,x_2=\frac{-b\plusmn\sqrt{b^2-4ac}}{2a}))$

- (c) What can you conclude from the theorem in the case $a = 2$, $b = −5$, $c = 3$? Check directly that this conclusion is correct.

  $25\gt24$

  $x_0,x_1=\frac{-(-5)\plusmn\sqrt{(-5)^2-4(2)(3)}  }{2(2)}$

  $x_0=\frac{5+\sqrt{1}  }{4}$; $x_1=\frac{5-\sqrt{1}  }{4}$ $\checkmark$

  The theorem holds true, as both the hypothesis and the conclusion are true.

- (d) What can you conclude from the theorem in the case $a = 2$, $b = 4$, $c = 3$?

  $16\ngtr24$

  $x_0,x_1\frac{-(4)\plusmn\sqrt{(-4)^2-4(2)(3)}  }{2(2)}$

  $x_0=\frac{4+\sqrt{3}i }{4}$; $x_1=\frac{4-\sqrt{3}i }{4}$ $\checkmark$

  The conclusion is false, but the hypothesis is also false, therefore, the theorem is true.

### 3. Consider the following incorrect theorem:

**Incorrect Theorem**._Suppose $n$ is a natural number larger than $2$, and $n$ is not a prime number. Then $2n + 13$ is not a prime number_.

What are the hypotheses and conclusion of this theorem? Show that
the theorem is incorrect by finding a counterexample.

**Hypothesis**: If $n$ is not prime and $n\in\N$ and $n\gt2$

**Conclusion**: Then $2n+13$ is not prime.

For any prime number $p$, where $\frac{p-13}{2}=n,p\geq19$

### \*4. Complete the following alternative proof of the theorem in Example 3.1.2.

_Proof_. Suppose $0\lt a\lt b$. Then $b-a\gt 0$.

[Fill in a proof of $b^2-a^2\gt 0$ here].

Multiplying both sides of $b-a\gt 0$ by $b$ gives us $b^2-ab\gt 0$

Multiplying both sides of $b-a\gt 0$ by $a$ gives us $ab-a^2\gt 0$

Thus, $b^2 \gt ab \gt a^2$, then $b^2\gt a^2$, thus $b^2-a^2\gt0$

Since $b^2-a^2\gt 0$, it follows that $a^2\lt b^2$. Therefore if $0\lt a \lt b$ then $a^2\lt b^2$

### 5. Suppose $a$ and $b$ are real numbers. Prove that if $a \lt b \lt 0$ then $a^2 \gt b^2$ .

_Proof_. Assume $a\lt b \lt 0$, then $a^2\gt b^2$

Since both $a$ and $b$ are less than $0$, multiplying by either $a$ or $b$ would reverse the direction of the inequality $a \lt b$, then

Multiplying both sides of $a \lt b$ by $a$ gives us $a^2 > ab$

Multiplying both sides of $a \lt b$ by $b$ gives us $ab > b^2$

Since $a^2 \gt ab \gt b^2$, it follows that $a^2 > b^2$. Therefore if $a\lt b \lt 0$, then $a^2\gt b^2$

### 6. Suppose $a$ and $b$ are real numbers. Prove that if $0\lt a \lt b$ then $\frac{1}{b}\lt\frac{1}{a}$

_Proof_. Assume $0 \lt a \lt b$,

$\frac{1}{a}\gt\frac{1}{b}$ is the multiplicative inverse of $a \lt b$, therefore if $0 \lt a \lt b$, then $\frac{1}{b}\lt\frac{1}{a}$

### 7. Suppose $a$ is a real number. Prove that if $a^3 \gt a$ then $a^5 \gt a$. (Hint: One approach is to start by completing the following equation: $a^5-a = (a^3-a)\cdot ?$)

_Proof_. Assume $a^3\gt a$, then $a^5\gt a$

Given $a^5-a=a(a^4-1)=a(a^2-1)(a^2+1)=(a^3-a)(a^2+1)$, then

$a^3\gt a\qquad ; \qquad a^3-a>0\text{ (i)}$

Multipliying (i) by $a^2+1$, we have

$(a^3-a)(a^2+1)\gt 0$

$a^5-a\gt 0 \quad \square$

### 8. Suppose $A \setminus B \subseteq C \cap D$ and $x \in A$. Prove that if $x\notin D$, then $x \in B$.

$\forall x \Bigg(x\in A \land x \notin B \implies x \in C \land x \in D\Bigg)$ (definitions of $\setminus$, $\subseteq$, $\cap$)

By contrapositive: Assume $x \notin B$, then $x \in D$

If $x\notin B$, then $x\in A \land x\notin B$ is true, then suppose $x \in D$, as defined

$true \implies x\in C \land x \in D$

Since $x \in C$ is irrelevant to our proof

$x \in D$

_Proof_. By contapositive Suppose $x \notin B$, it follows from $A \setminus B \subseteq C \cap D$, that $x \in D$.
Therefore, if $x \notin D$, then $x \in B$.
