**∗1.** Analyze the logical forms of the following statements:

- **(a)** We’ll have either a reading assignment or homework problems, but we
won’t have both homework problems and a test.

    Let

    $R=$ We have a reading assignment

    $H=$ We have homework problems

    $T=$ We have a test

    Then (a) is

    $R \lor H \land \neg (H \land T)$

- **(b)** You won’t go skiing, or you will and there won’t be any snow.

    Let

    $W=$ You will go skiing

    $S=$ There will be snow

    Then (b) is

    $\neg W \lor (W \land \neg S)$

- **(c)** $\sqrt{7} \nleq 2$

    Breaking down the statement into its parts, we have

    $\neg(\sqrt{7}<2) \qquad \neg(\sqrt{7}=2)$

    Combining both, we have

    $\neg(\sqrt{7}<2) \land \neg(\sqrt{7}=2) \equiv\neg[(\sqrt{7}<2) \land (\sqrt{7}=2)]$

2. Analyze the logical forms of the following statements:
- **(a)** Either John and Bill are both telling the truth, or neither of them is.

    Let

    $J=$ John is telling the truth

    $B=$ Bill is telling the truth

    Then, (a) is

    $(J \land B) \lor \neg (J \land B)$

- **(b)** I’ll have either fish or chicken, but I won’t have both fish and mashed potatoes.

    Let

    $F=$ Fish

    $C=$ Chicken

    $M=$ Mashed potatoes

    Then

    $(F \lor C) \land \neg(F \land M)$

- **(c)** 3 is a common divisor of 6, 9, and 15.

    Let

    $D_1=$ 3 is a divisor of 6

    $D_2=$ 3 is a divisor of 9

    $D_3=$ 3 is a divisor of 15

    Then

    $(D_1 \land D_2 \land D_3)$

**3.** Analyze the logical forms of the following statements:

Let

$A=$ Alice is in the room

$B=$ Bob is in the room

$C=$ Alice and Bob are in the room

- **(a)** Alice and Bob are not both in the room.

    $\neg C$

- **(b)** Alice and Bob are both not in the room.

    $\neg(A \land B)$

- **(c)** Either Alice or Bob is not in the room.

    $\neg A \lor \neg B$

- **(d)** Neither Alice nor Bob is in the room.

    $\neg(A \land B)$

**4.** Which of the following expressions are well-formed formulas?
- **(a)** $\neg(\neg P \lor \neg \neg R)$. (this one is)
- **(b)** $\neg(P,Q,\land R)$.
- **(c)** $P \land \neg P$. (this one is)
- **(d)** $(P\land Q)(P \lor R)$.


***5.** Let $P$ stand for the statement “I will buy the pants” and $S$ for the statement “I will buy the shirt.” What English sentences are represented by the following expressions?
- **(a)** $\neg(P \land \neg S)$. I will not buy the pants without the shirt.
- **(b)** $\neg P \land \neg S$. I will neither buy the pants or the shirt.
- **(c)** $\neg P \lor \neg S$. I will either not buy the shirt, or not buy the pants.

**6.** Let $S$ stand for the statement “Steve is happy” and $G$ for “George is happy.” What English sentences are represented by the following expressions?

- **(a)** $(S \lor G) \land (\neg S \lor\neg G)$. Either steve is happy or George is happy, but
- **(b)** $[S \lor (G \land\neg S)]\lor\neg G$. Either Steve is happy or Steve is not happy and George is happy, or George is not happy.
- **(c)** $S \lor [G \land (\neg S \lor\neg G)]$. Either Steve is happy or George is happy and Either Steve or George is not happy.

**7.** Identify the premises and conclusions of the following deductive arguments and analyze their logical forms. Do you think the reasoning is valid? (Although you will have only your intuition to guide you in answering this last question, in the next section we will develop some techniques for determining the validity of arguments.)
- **(a)** Jane and Pete won’t both win the math prize. Pete will win either the math prize or the chemistry prize. Jane will win the math prize. Therefore, Pete will win the chemistry prize.
    - Premises:
      - Jane and Pete won’t both win the math prize.
      - Pete will win either the math prize or the chemistry prize.
      - Jane will win the math prize.
    - Conclusion
      - Pete will win the chemistry prize
    - Validity
      - The reasoning is valid, because the first and second statement declare mutual exclusion for the two events.

- **(b)** The main course will be either beef or fish. The vegetable will be either peas or corn. We will not have both fish as a main course and corn as a vegetable. Therefore, we will not have both beef as a main course and peas as a vegetable.
    - Premises:
      - The main course will be either beef or fish.
      - The vegetable will be either peas or corn.
      - We will not have both fish as a main course and corn as a vegetable.
    - Conclusion
      - We will not have both beef as a main course and peas as a vegetable.
    - Validity
      - The reasoning is valid, because the third statement is the conclusion.
- **(c)** Either John or Bill is telling the truth. Either Sam or Bill is lying. Therefore, either John is telling the truth or Sam is lying.
    - Premises:
      - Either John or Bill is telling the truth.
      - Either Sam or Bill is lying.
    - Conclusion
      - Either John is telling the truth or Sam is lying.
    - Validity
      - The reasoning is not valid, because none of the premises exclude John from lying or Sam from telling the truth (Bill could be either).
- **(d)** Either sales will go up and the boss will be happy, or expenses will go up and the boss won’t be happy. Therefore, sales and expenses will not both go up.
    - Premises:
      - Sales will go up and the boss will be happy.
      - Expenses will go up and the boss won’t be happy.
    - Conclusion
      - Sales and expenses will not both go up.
    - Validity
      - The reasoning is not valid, because the premises do not exclude each other.