## Section 1.3

#### ∗1. Analyze the logical forms of the following statements:

- (a) 3 is a common divisor of 6, 9, and 15. (Note: You did this in exercise 2 of Section 1.1, but you should be able to give a better answer now.)

  Let $D(x)$ be "$x$ is divisible by $3$"

  then $D(6) \land D(9) \land D(15)$

- (b) x is divisible by both 2 and 3 but not 4.

  Let

  $D(y, z)$ be "$y$ is divisible by $z$"

  Then $x\in\{y|D(y,2) \land D(y,3) \land \neg D(y,4)\}$

- (c) x and y are natural numbers, and exactly one of them is prime.

  Let

  $P(x)$ be "$x$ is a prime number"

  $N(x)$ be "$x$ is a natural number"

  "Exactly one of them is prime" can also be read as "Either $x$ is prime, and $y$ is not prime, or $y$ is prime, and $x$ is not prime"

  Then $N(x) \land N(y) \land [(P(x)\land \neg P(y)) \lor (\neg P(x)\land P(y))]$

#### 2. Analyze the logical forms of the following statements:

- (a) x and y are men, and either x is taller than y or y is taller than x.

  Let

  $M(x)$ be "$x$ is a man"

  $T(x, y)$ be "$x$ is taller than $y$"

  Then

  $M(x) \land M(y) \land [T(x,y) \lor T(y, x)]$

- (b) Either x or y has brown eyes, and either x or y has red hair.

  Let

  $B(x)$ be "$x$ has brown eyes"

  $R(x)$ be "$x$ has red hair"

  Then (b) becomes

  $[(B(x) \lor B(y)) \land (T(x) \lor T(y))]$

- (c) Either x or y has both brown eyes and red hair.

  $[(B(x) \land T(x)) \lor (B(y) \land T(y))]$

#### ∗3. Write definitions using elementhood tests for the following sets:

- (a) {Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, Pluto}.

  $y\in \big\{x\mid x\text{ is a planet of the solar system}\big\}$

- (b) {Brown, Columbia, Cornell, Dartmouth, Harvard, Princeton, University of Pennsylvania, Yale}.

  $y \in  \big\{x\mid x\text{ is an Ivy League university}\big\}$

- (c) {Alabama, Alaska, Arizona, . . . , Wisconsin, Wyoming}.

  $y \in \big\{x\mid x\text{ is state of the United States}\big\}$

- (d) {Alberta, British Columbia, Manitoba, New Brunswick, Newfoundland and Labrador, Northwest Territories, Nova Scotia, Nunavut, Ontario, Prince Edward Island, Quebec, Saskatchewan, Yukon}.

  $y\in \big\{x\mid x\text{ is a canadian state}\big\}$

#### 4. Write definitions using elementhood tests for the following sets:

- (a) {1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, 49, . . .}.

  $y\in \big\{x\in\Z \mid x^2\big\}$

- (b) {1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, . . .}.

  $y\in \big\{x\in\Z^+ \mid 2^x \big\}$

- (c) {10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19}.

  $y\in \big\{x \mid 9 < x < 20 \big\}$

#### ∗5. Simplify the following statements. Which variables are free and which are bound? If the statement has no free variables, say whether it is true or false.

- (a) $-3 \in \big\{x \in \R \mid 13-2x > 1\big\}$.

  $-3 \in \big\{x \in \R \mid x < 6\big\}$

  It has no free variables, as 3 is a constant; $x$ is bound. The statement is true, as $-3 < 6$

- (b) $4 \in \big\{ x\in\R^- \mid 13-2x>1\big\}$.

  $4 \in \big\{x \in \R^- \mid x < 6\big\}$

  It has no free variables, $x$ is bound. The statement is false, as $4 \notin \R^-$

- (c) $5\notin \big\{x\in\R\mid 13-2x>c\big\}$.

  $5\notin \big\{x\in\R\mid x<\frac{13-c}{2}\big\}$

  $c$ is the only free variable; $x$ is bound. The statement is true for any $c>3$

#### 6. Simplify the following statements. Which variables are free and which are bound? If the statement has no free variables, say whether it is true or false.

- (a) $w \in \big\{x \in \R \mid 13-2x>c\big\}$

  $$(w \in \R)\land(13-2w>c)$$

$x$ is bound; $w$ is free, it's true if the inequation $w<\frac{13-c}{2}$ is satisfied.

- (b) $4 \in \big\{x\in\R\mid 13-2x\in \{y \mid \text{ y is a prime number}\}\big\}$. (It might make this statement easier to read if we let P = {y | y is a prime number}; using this notation, we could rewrite the statement as 4 ∈ {x ∈ R | 13 − 2x ∈ P}.)

  Let $P(x)$ be "$x$ is a prime number"

  Then the statement (b) becomes

  $$(4\in\R)\land [P(13-2(4))]$$

  $x$ is bound, no free variables. The statement is true.

- (c) $4 \in \Big\{x\in \{y\mid \text{y is a prime number}\} \mid 13-2x>1\Big\}$. (Using the same notation as in part (b), we could write this as 4 ∈ {x ∈ P | 13 − 2x > 1}.)

  Using the same $P(x)$ defined in part (b)

  $$[P(4)]\land(13-2(4)>1)$$

  The statement is false, as $P(4)$ is false.

#### ∗7. What are the truth sets of the following statements? List a few elements of the truth set if you can.

- (a) Elizabeth Taylor was once married to x.

  $\{x \mid \text{Elizabeth Taylor was once married to x}\}=\{\text{Conrad Hilton Jr., Michael Wilding, Mike Todd, Eddie Fisher, Richard Burton, John Warner, Larry Fortensky}\}$

- (b) x is a logical connective studied in Section 1.1.

  $\{x \mid \text{x is a logical connective studied in Section 1.1}\}=\{\land, \lor, \neg\}$

- (c) x is the author of this book.

  $\{x \mid \text{x is the author of this book}\}=\{\text{Daniel Velleman}\}$

#### 8. What are the truth sets of the following statements? List a few elements of the truth set if you can.

- (a) $x$ is a real number and $x^2 − 4x + 3 = 0$.

  $x^2 − 4x + 3 = (x-3)(x-1)$

  $\big\{x\in\R|x\in\{3,1\}\big\}$

- (b) $x$ is a real number and $x^2 − 2x + 3 = 0$.

  The truth set is $\phi$ (the empty set), as the solution does not involve real numbers, making the statement a contradiction.

- (c) $x$ is a real number and $5 \in \{y \in \R \mid x^2 + y^2 < 50\}$.

  $(x^2 + (5)^2 <50)\land (5\in\R) \land(x\in\R)$

  Then the thruth set is $\{x \in \R \mid x < 5\}$
